[Music]
welcome to topcast
episode 43 if you're on the podcast
audio only version otherwise this is the
beginning of infinity chapter breakdowns
as david deutsch has called them
and this is chapter 16 the evolution
of creativity part one
i presume this is going to go quite a
while because as i was rereading it for
the umpteenth
time i realized there was a lot to
unpack
there was a lot to break down and i
was only a few pages in and it's because
this
chapter is unusual in a sense that i
would say
that it's not entirely self-contained i
think with a lot of other chapters
let's take the multiverse chapter or
a physicist history of bad philosophy i
think you could
dive into those chapters and pretty much
take away some really important messages
without referring to other parts of the
book
in this chapter it's almost like what
has gone before
have been the bricks cumulative building
the knowledge required in order to
fully understand what's being said here
and so
in a sense i would argue there's some
prerequisite knowledge
but for the purpose of my breakdown i'm
going to try to provide some of that
context
that may have appeared earlier on in the
book so that anyone listening to this
for the first time will understand
the gravity of what being what is being
said here i think
that this chapter as much as chapter 7
artificial creativity is providing a
guide almost for a research program
avenues that need to be explored the
unknowns
in what we know about creativity
i think creativity is a genuine mystery
i think there's a
number of these that exist now
some people deny certain kinds of
mysteries or try to explain them away
but whatever you want to call this
unique
feature of human beings as far as we
know unique feature of human beings
perhaps there are
intelligent life forms out there
somewhere else that are also able to
explain the world in which they find
themselves but for now
as far as we know here on this planet
right now
there's no other being that can do what
we do in terms of
creativity and it's explanatory
creativity which is the key thing being
able to explain
the phenomena around us so that we can
literally
change the world around us and we're
going to get to the significance of that
i'm going to reinforce some of the
things i've said earlier and some of the
things certainly that david has said in
the beginning of infinity
prior to us getting to this chapter but
there is
an assumption here by the time we get to
chapter 16
that you are fully on board i suppose
with the beginning of infinity worldview
as i guess if you're reading the book
chronologically
from chapter one through to where we are
now in the penultimate chapter at the
beginning of infinity
one would presume that you understand
what has gone before
and when you find yourself here at the
evolution of creativity
david is rightly assuming you know what
knowledge means what explanations are
about
what the correct theory of evolution is
not lamarcism but
neo-darwinism the fact that
we don't understand certain things about
human creativity there's something
unique about human creativity
and here we're going to really dive into
why it is
that human creativity is going to be
more significant than certain other
what we might say natural forces that
exist out there
in the cosmos they still exist and
they're still going to
shape the reality around us but it is
creativity that into the future is going
to become more
and more and more important to the
evolution
not just of human civilization but the
physical universe as a whole
that we will be using knowledge we our
descendants
any technological uh
artificial general intelligences that we
create
perhaps other life forms that happen to
exist out there as well
the major factor in how the universe
will undergo its evolution into the deep
future is going to depend not just on
the physical forces
this is one of the failings i suppose a
physical scientist when they try to
prophesy they would say predict but to
prophesy
exactly what's going to happen into the
distant future
you know if we're talking astronomy um
and we're talking about the evolution of
the sun today i happen to be recording
this i don't know when i'm going to
release it
but on the 23rd of december 2020
yesterday being the summer solstice here
in australia
the longest day of all and in fact um
and in fact if i don't truncate this
this long soliloquy
we're going to end up with sun rays
shining straight in here it's already
quite bright at the moment but i'm going
to be facing the sun
straight away very shortly it'll be
shining straight into my eyes
this happens very few times throughout
the course of the year but today is one
of those days where it
absolutely will and that sun will
continue to shine
according to astrophysical models for at
least another five
billion years and astronomers are fond
of saying and then
the sun will die then the sun will
become
a nova not a supernova will become a
nova it will expand into a red giant
and then it will eventually have its
core collapse and it will release
the outer layers of its atmosphere off
into the
solar system this is going to be called
a planetary nebula
leaving behind nothing but its cooling
hot white core called a white dwarf now
all of that story is a scientific
prediction
based upon our best astrophysics
theories and explanations as of right
now in 2020
however we don't know what people of the
future are going to do
it is as magical to us that any any
person would be
able to change the evolution that a
typical star goes through
like the sun as would be people saying
in the past that people of today would
be able to control something like
lightning and a thunderstorm but we kind
of can now
we kind of can we can we can create our
own lightning if we like
in in power stations we can use it to
power
civilization that would have seemed
absolutely astonishing to the people of
the past
and we're only talking people of a few
centuries
imagine people not just a few millennia
hence
but people a million or a billion years
into the future
will they have the capacity to control
stars possibly
no rule no law of physics rules that
possibility out
so people might very well decide to do
something
to the sun to keep it shining or perhaps
to cause it to disappear
sooner than otherwise would have maybe
they will use the matter in the sun for
something
who knows we can't do psychology on
people a billion years into the future
but the point is
astrophysicists who today say they can
predict
what will happen to the sun billions of
years hence are assuming
that the choices that people make then
will have no effect upon the sun but
they might
people for that reason are cosmically
significant
and it is their creativity that allows
them to come up with these possibilities
these explanations of reality and then
allow them to choose amongst
all of the new choices that are
available to them
to change reality in ways that
no person with a good understanding
of the mere physics of the situation
would be able to do mere physics is not
going to be able to tell you
what people will choose to do with the
sun in the future
in fact according to our best
explanation of what people are
and explanations and the growth of
knowledge being that the growth of
knowledge is inherently unpredictable
and this means that people have the
capacity to really choose to create
new knowledge to bring it into the world
it wasn't there before
and it wasn't predictable beforehand but
so far as we know
this is a kind of law of epistemology
as on solid foundation none of them are
on solid foundation as on solid
foundation
as any law of physics happens to be we
can't predict what people will do next
because we don't know what kind of
knowledge they're going to create next
because the growth of knowledge is
inherently unpredictable
and one reason it is is because we don't
know what problems we're going to
encounter next
that's another issue with predictability
and if we don't know what
problems we're going to encounter next
we can't possibly imagine what kind of
solutions will be dreamt up by people
of tomorrow when they encounter the
problems of tomorrow
we're not there it would mean predicting
the future in ways that we don't have
access to getting far ahead of myself
and going off onto a tangent
as i say in this introduction
possibly going to be me talking far more
that i'm reading i think if i've if i go
back and i
re-look at some of the episodes uh you
may notice that it's often
something of the order of 70 percent of
me talking and 30
me reading and sometimes i'll get up to
50 or a little over 50 percent of the
time i'll spend reading
today i expect to be reading far less
talking far more it certainly may be
worth going back
and re-reading or re-listening to
chapter seven
artificial creativity prior to this
because it really is key to
understanding the evolution
of creativity back there we kind of have
some explanations of what we mean by
creativity
creativity of the human kind not
creativity of
the evolutionary kind namely the kind of
creativity
that mindless dna
mindless genes happen to go through in
their creation of new species
we use that word advisedly but the
species that come into existence really
are created they weren't there before
and so the dna is able to create these
new
species via the process of evolution by
natural selection
we don't fully understand that process
there are
gaps in our knowledge about that and i
think i've said before one of the gaps
in my knowledge about the beginning of
infinity
was that i thought prior to the
beginning of infinity
and coming to understand david's
perspective on this
the process of evolution by natural
selection
it's understood in broad strokes in some
ways
in fine details in other ways but there
is no way that we understand
everything by the metric that as david
puts it very well
and this is also back in chapter 7 page
if you can't program it you haven't
understood it
which is a deep
maxim running through the beginning of
infinity
and that if someone purports to
understand something
consciousness let's say and they can't
write
an algorithm such that a computer could
be programmed
to instantiate that particular quality
then the person doesn't
really understand what they're talking
about
their broad brushstrokes will be too
broad to really capture
in david's understanding what the term
understand
really means and this is true of
evolution by natural selection
we cannot program a computer that can
really evolve in the way that
life forms evolve over time on earth
all we get is evolution within the
parameters
of whatever the programmer has decided
those parameters will be and what those
rules would be
but evolution by natural selection in
the real world
throws up the unpredictable throws up
the genuinely new
that genuinely created by a mechanism we
don't have a
full handle on there are many unknowns
with evolution by natural selection
but it remains of course just because
there are very very many unknowns
doesn't mean you leap to
some other theory where there are even
more unknowns
this is a common misconception within
epistemology and of course that's the
god of the gaps idea if someone comes
along
and says well you people who think that
evolution by natural selection
is a good explanation can't explain x
y and z and they might be right that we
can't explain
x y and z may then say well therefore
creationism of the kind that a religious
person believes in
is really true it's the better
explanation
of course it's not because they also
can't explain xyz
except by recourse to the general
purpose explanation of god did it
okay or a wizard did it as david likes
to say so
what evolution by natural selection does
deficient though it is in some areas by
which i mean
unable to fully explain absolutely
everything
about the origin of species and
biology as we see it all sciences are
like this
all sciences have gaps that's the whole
point of science there's no such thing
ever as a completed science what we have
are ever better explanations for better
theories over time
and evolution by natural selection is
one such
where we do not know with the fidelity
required to program a computer exactly
how evolution by natural selection works
now there are some theories that we know
well enough that we can
program a computer these theories are
often the ones that we have
shown to be false and trivially of
course
newtonian gravity newtonian mechanics
classical mechanics is kind of like this
we're able to program computers to
perfectly well replicate what
newtonian classical mechanics is able to
predict
and it's able to predict to some extent
the motion of bodies throughout the
solar system it gets it wrong
in ways that general relativity does not
however
we know it well enough to be able to
program our computers with it so too
with general relativity of course
now when it comes to human creativity
we don't have the capacity
either to program into a computer human
creativity
if we did then we could program a
computer to be
humanly creative which would mean we'd
be able to program it to
have the capacity of or have the quality
of being a human
in other words it would be a human or at
least be a person would be a better way
of saying things of course
a human would be a special case of a
person in that case
because we would have a person inside of
a
silicon device of some sort but it would
still be a person because it would be
creating an
open-ended stream of knowledge it'd be
creating explanations he'll be trying to
understand its world
in the way that we understand the world
through conjecture and refutation and so
on the way that popper explained that
knowledge
grows so without further ado
let me get into the book and into
chapter 16 the evolution of creativity
and i'm going to stop quite frequently i
hope this isn't
too frustrating for listeners but we'll
see how we go
and david begins what use was creativity
of all the countless biological
adaptations that have evolved on our
planet
creativity is the only one that can
produce scientific
or mathematical knowledge art or
philosophy
pausing there because straight away
straight away we have a statement that
should really make us put the brakes on
and just
unpack for a moment this here
this first claim here that creativity is
the only one that enables us to produce
mathematical scientific knowledge art or
philosophy
tells us something about the difference
between humans and
other animals that long wondered about
moral dichotomy what makes us special
are we special aren't we just another
animal
a curious kind of water ape that can
talk well these kinds of ways of
diminishing what people
are i would say diminishing what people
are and as i like to say
diminishing their cosmic significance
suffer from the flaw that they
overlook the fact that it is creativity
so far as we know
completely unique to humans in the
universe as of today
that allows for us to produce science
and philosophy
and the real key is that that capacity
allows us to model in our own minds
the rest of reality which increases our
models
increase in their fidelity in
representing the rest of reality
over time as well that is an absolutely
astonishing fact
about ourselves and
reality as a whole and the laws of
physics which allow
this to happen that inside of our minds
we create models of everything else
that's out there
and over time through creativity
through generating explanations
that become increasingly hard to vary
the model in our minds
more closely resembles the actual
reality
that is out there and as david says in
one of his ted talks
it contains a superficial image of the
things that are out there but far
more than that the relationships between
the abstract objects that are inside of
our minds
become far more closely related to the
relationships between
physical objects that are out there in
space-time
and behaving in certain ways in fact
space-time itself considered as an
object in physical reality as well
that our models of these things
space-time matter and energy
civilization
living things so on and so forth etc etc
our models of those things inside of our
minds come to
resemble to mirror what is going on
out there with increasing fidelity over
time
never perfectly and always
with the possibility that what we think
could in fact be wrong but there's
something there
that is converging we are converging
upon
a reality the model here represents
what's out there and that's true for
everyone and it's this very strange
thing because i think it might have been
feynman who said
people are interesting because it's
almost like it's atoms
observing atoms atoms looking at atoms
but it's far deeper than that of course
it's not just atoms looking at atoms
as astonishing as a fact as that might
be
a a an insect would be a collection of
atoms looking at other atoms as well
this is a set of atoms that is observing
the world certainly but coming to
understand
the world and generating a model of the
world as well
okay so let's continue now as
you can see the sun is beginning to
creep in so
i'm sure it's destroying my green screen
behind me in some way
but we will persevere anyway i could
close the blinds but i just want to see
i'm just using my creativity to see what
the heck is going to happen with my
carefully set up arrangement here
when the full force of the sun 150
million kilometers away
at a core temperature of 15 million
kelvin and a surface temperature of
5500 kelvin comes blaring straight
through that window straight into my
eyes
let's see what happens i'm i'm ready for
this ride let's see what
it's almost christmas i'm just i want to
see
if something really unusual happens
like it completely destroys my recording
or something like that okay
okay so we've we've read a sentence so
far let's
go to the next one through the resulting
technology and institutions
it has had spectacular physical effects
most notably
near human habitations but also further
afield
a substantial portion of the earth's
land area is now used
for human purposes human choice
itself a product of creativity
determines which other species to
exclude
and which to tolerate or cultivate which
rivers to divert
which hills to level and which
wildernesses
to preserve now i'm not even going to
get through that sentence without
pausing myself
right at the beginning of it where david
says human choice
itself a product of creativity
this link i
haven't read anywhere else quite so
explicitly it may be out there
among other philosophers but if so i
haven't read them
i've read some of the texts that many
other people read on the topic
uh namely on creativity
and on free will but we tend not to get
this kind of link and david doesn't
mention
much about free will in the beginning of
infinity
um but but it is mentioned and it's and
it's mentioned in the context of
creativity and i'm really attracted to
this idea
that human choice is indeed a product
of creativity and it certainly informed
my own thinking on this whole idea
i don't know how to divorce
free will from choices that if choice
exists in the world
and in then then if choice exists in the
world
and we are the agents
that do the choosing then we have
free will our will the thing that we
want
is free to choose among these things now
it wouldn't be
it wouldn't be if of course as many
people observe if
someone coerced you in some way then
your will is less
free you want to do x but you're not
allowed to do x
for fear of violence or something else
fear of death perhaps
so you can't do x so your will has been
constrained to do something else you
don't really have
the free will that you didn't so i think
free will is this spectrum
this these degrees of freedom that you
have
and and importantly with human beings
unlike with say
dogs or cats okay you have the classy
experiment
figure out what what what food the dog
likes and say you put out two different
kinds of food
and you let the dog go to the one that
it prefers
did the dog really make a choice well in
one sense it kind of did because there
were two things there in existence but
it did
really contemplate or did it just rely
upon
what its genes were telling it to do are
we any different in this case
we are because unlike with the dog
we can choose to create something
completely new
that isn't there before us and that
choice itself that choice to
actually do go through the effort of
creating
is itself a free choice that we don't
have to make
one can consider when you know in a
similar situation
in the evening you want to have dinner
you've got a certain number of things in
the fridge
there's a certain number of ways in
which you could combine them into
interesting meals
you can choose among them that's a free
choice but you could also choose to
do something completely different and go
to the supermarket and buy some more
ingredients
or to call up a restaurant and get
something delivered
so on and so forth etc etc we really can
create new choices bring new choices
into the world this is our
creativity in action and the act of
choosing
among these things is what i would
regard as free will
so i i just regard creativity
choices and free will and this capacity
to explain the world
as all intimately linked none of them
have good explanations and so it's for
this reason i kind of agree with david
where he says elsewhere in the book
that they might all come along for the
ride
in the one jump to universality that as
soon as you have this jump
to explanatory universality people being
universal explainers
then all of those things come along
including consciousness as well perhaps
we don't know but the point is that
it seems like a parsimonious idea that
these are all facets
of the one deep profound mystery of what
human personhood is about we're
conscious
we're creative we make choices in the
world we do those
freely and so
perhaps whatever the ultimate
explanation is of these things or what
whatever the
explanation of the future is that
enables us to
create artificial general intelligence
that we will recognize
that these words that we use creativity
consciousness
free will whatever that all of these
things will come together in some way
we'll have a better understanding of
each of them
and the ways in which they are real but
i say that they're real
one reason i say that they're real is
because they are
unavoidably part of the explanation of
what it is that people are doing is an
explanation of their behavior
an explanation of how it is they create
science and civilization
and everything else that trying to
remove
any of them causes more problems than it
solves
you're left wondering if you think
something like
creativity isn't some kind of deep
mystery
um that in fact all we need is ever more
um faster hardware and eventually we
will
achieve escape velocity we'll have
artificial intelligence that is
creative and more creative than us and
it's just a matter of processing power
which is seems to be the
most popular idea right now
okay the the this nick bostrom
singularity idea that all we need is
faster processing
and once we've got sufficient amount of
processing sufficient amount of memory
so on and so forth then we will have an
agent that is able to think faster than
us
about anything at all better than us and
therefore the problem of creativity is
solved at the hardware
at the hardware level many of us think
that is completely wrong that assumes
a solution to what creativity is its
sidelines creativity
and says creativity is no deep mystery
that that we
are just um uh processors with some
memory
and there's nothing particularly special
about the software of course what
the beginning of infinity teaches us
what david deutsch's main point is
in a lot of this is that the hardware
has very little to do with this
mystery at all it's all about the
software
this is the great mystery we have this
algorithm running on our
brains that is able to
improve itself over time and improve its
understanding of the world over time as
well
and it can augment itself with
technology
but it's got nothing to do with how fast
we can think
um the computer can think faster than us
but it's not more creative than us
right now but but of all of these
qualities i would say of the human mind
which
may be synonymous one with another
creativity
choices consciousness um the ability to
be a universal explainer
free will that last one the freewheel
one is the most contentious one it seems
to me
maybe consciousness is up there as well
and as i've observed elsewhere
there are certain philosophers who will
deny free will
but regard some of the other aspects of
this
as deeply mysterious sam harris who i
respect
very much and love to listen to on this
particular topic
has written a book a vehement defense of
the idea
we do not have free will simultaneously
he also argues that the deepest mystery
in the universe
aside from the existence of the universe
itself is the fact that we are conscious
so as he dismisses the free will issue
uprisings consciousness as being a
profound and deep mystery and he says
that his subjective experience of
consciousness
reveals to him that free will doesn't
exist that you do not have a subjective
experience of consciousness
and here all i can say to that
is we would just have to disagree
because i do have a subjective
experience of consciousness
now if you meditate and clear your mind
of everything
it should be no surprise to you that it
seems as if
you have no free will because it then
seems as if the thoughts are arising
unbidden
by you but if you are really
trying not to concentrate and actively
trying to dampen down your
thinking then of course it will feel as
though
it will be a sensation and this is this
is a theme running through
sam's philosophy this idea of feelings
that you have the sensation or the
experience
of not having free will or the absence
of free will
i'm unsurprised that you feel as though
you've got an absence of free will
when you're not thinking when you're
trying to think hard about what to
choose to do next
but if you try to be conscious of the
choices before you
i think that in those moments and you
can be mindful
in your conscious experience of the
present moment i think you will find
that
you can experience the very real
sensation of
actually having choices in the world and
that you will freely be able to choose
one thing over another but this takes us
far and wide away from where i want to
go with this chapter
just to say that almost in any of these
debates where people end up at
loggerheads about
the existence of free will and i i
i think we can happily grant to people
okay i'll agree with you that your form
of free will
doesn't exist okay for the purpose of
moving forward and making progress
on this particular question what's the
particular question
the deep profound mystery that almost
everyone interested in this topic will
agree is there somewhere
so sam might think well it's not there
in free will okay fine
it's there in consciousness then i agree
i think we need to solve that
that that's a really important thing to
solve
now daniel dennett of course as many of
us when we've read his book
interpret him to be saying that
consciousness is no
deep mystery and so
he he he dampens down consciousness but
what rises up
for him is free will he's a
compatibilist and he says well this is a
a mystery it's it's compatible with
the deterministic laws of physics which
is my view as well
so it tends to be the case and jaron
lenier makes
makes this point as well that when
people deny
one mysterious aspect of reality it
tends to crop up
unbidden somewhere else in their uh
ontology you know what they
think reality consists of in some way
and he uses the the example of
the nature of personhood that if you
dismiss the deep mystery that is
what it means to be a person what a
person is and the fact that a person is
in his words an infinite will of mystery
which is this this idea that tries to
capture the fact that we don't have an
answer
to what a person is we can't program
computers to be people he agrees with
david deutsch there
he says the people who dismiss that as
being some sort of deep mystery
tend to find themselves caught up in
concerns or confusions about what the
present moment means
because the people who dismiss the deep
mystery of personhood
are often reductionists
in the physicalist sense they see a
block universe
you know as general relativity might say
is that the past
times and the future times as well as
the present time
are or just instances of times there's
just times
off into the 13.7 billion years into the
past and off into the
extreme deep distant future but there's
no
privileged times yesterday is just as
real as today as tomorrow in a
in this universe described by a special
relativity
um this block universe all of the times
exist in some way
and none of them are privileged that's
the picture we get
it's just your perspective okay if
you're on the other side of the universe
then the time that you see is not
simultaneous with my time we get into
this deep
questions of physics right but a person
who believes
um that there's no mystery there then
has to try and explain
why it is that now here for you things
are special something is different the
present moment is illuminated in a way
that yesterday is not
that you don't experience yesterday in
the same way that you experienced today
right now you only experience now now so
there's this weird mystery um that
exists in the universe
about why the present moment is
different to other moments
while you experience the present moment
is different to other moments this is
what jaren lenier says about people who
try to deny
the deep mystery of consciousness it
tends to crop up in this other way
and so too i would say with any of these
questions about
creativity or free will or choice um
and consciousness we've gotten
barely through the first paragraph okay
so let's let's keep going
and i'm going to pause again shortly
just to recap
human choice itself a product of
creativity determines
which other species to exclude and which
to tolerate or cultivate which rivers to
divert which heals the level
and which wilderness is to preserve and
this is a very beginning of infinity
thing to say because it again cast
people
rightly so rightly so as
heroic in the universe as
saviors not destroyers as people who are
trying their best not only to survive on
the planet but to help other life forms
as well we're the only
so far as i know uh modular the odd
exception to the rule out there
somewhere but we're basically the only
species that consistently helps other
species there might be symbiotic
relationships out there somewhere other
where
sometimes one species will help another
species in order to get help back from
itself but
um people here on this planet we try and
save the pandas
even though the pandas apparently don't
want to be saved and aren't trying to
save themselves if human beings
did not exist the extinction level event
would eventually happen it could be
tomorrow
it could be 50 years
50 000 years 50 million years the
asteroid
is coming the supernova might happen
the climate will change
and there will be nothing that other
species on the planet will be able to do
about it
only we and our choices
and our ability to create knowledge will
be able to do anything about those
things
and we will we will choose to do
the right thing for ourselves and as a
side effect that will
often help other species people like to
preserve
wilderness areas some of us more than
others
because some of us think that wilderness
areas are actually beautiful
aesthetically beautiful and so that's a
reason for preserving them
we also do like the look of tigers and
lions
and like to be able to go on safari so
if for no other reason
than that we like to try and preserve
the environment in which we find
ourselves
of course it's the consensus right now
that humans are causing
the next mass extinction and all of the
damage around the world
but this is not true this is not true
it is only people that are saving the
planet
from destroying everything that's on the
the geological forces the cosmological
forces
that are out there eroding the planet
destroying
species and habitats only we are saving
it now
the small amount of if side effects that
we have
by us trying to eek out in existence in
this extremely hostile environment
will of course sometimes displace other
animals from their habitat
but those other animals inevitably will
be wiped out
will go extinct by the next extinction
level event which is
going to happen that is the history 99.9
percent of all species that have ever
existed on the planet have gone extinct
and that will continue to happen we
want to be the exception and the only
way we can be the exception is to use
our capacity to create explanatory
knowledge
and the only way we can make other
species the exception
is to use our capacity to create
explanatory knowledge
and to use the resources that are
available to us to protect ourselves and
those other animals
if we slow down our progress and the
rate of knowledge creation
not only do we condemn ourselves to
certain extinction
we condemn the rest of the species on
the planet
to certain extinction as well and even
if you're only concerned about
life in some form surviving it won't
the expansion of the sun absent us being
here
will absolutely sterilize the surface of
the earth
so there is this irony with us right now
that we are the only species able to
save the panda for example or save the
whale
while we're simultaneously being blamed
for
both of those species extinctions okay
take the blue whale and the the asian
panda um
we are the only ones doing anything to
try and save these animals
and yet we are consistently blamed for
killing or destroying those animals
um even if you think that it's possible
that both of those things will happen
the whales and the pandas will all be
wiped out
at some point in the future by a natural
catastrophe
unless we step in now nature is not
friendly
it's hostile the universe is terribly
implacably
hostile okay i've nearly
completed a paragraph let's go back to
the book
david writes in the night sky
a bright fast-moving spot may well be a
space station
carrying humans higher and faster than
any biological adaptation can carry
anything
or it may be a satellite through which
humans communicate across
across distances that biological
communication has never spanned
using phenomena such as radio waves and
nuclear reactions
which biology has never harnessed the
unique effects of creativity
dominate our experience of the world
ok again um and then the sun has begun
to shine straight into my eyes
i'm going to persevere anyway i'm not
closing those blinds i'm refusing to do
so i'm going to be
creative and just see what happens um
okay so the unique effects of creativity
dominate our experience of the world
said david there
and i've made this point before about
if you live in any city around the world
and you look around
then what you see is
less due to the action of
purely deterministic physical forces you
know in the case of sydney
the action of geological weathering and
erosion over time
eroded out the sydney basin and i've
made this point before
but if you look at the city skyline of
sydney
and i'll come back to this shortly with
a specific example you look at the city
skyline of sydney
trying to use our natural sciences in
order to explain what's going on there
the appearance what we see in this
picture of the sydney cbd
trying to use geology or plain
physics in order to explain any of this
is
going to be a fruitless exercise
you're going to miss the point if you
try and use
those natural sciences you need to use
the proper
explanation why does sydney look like
this well the reason sydney looks like
this and there's a number of buildings
there that are prominent but let's take
um
sydney tower there which is the tallest
building at least as of today in sydney
someone chose to build that thing and
someone chose
to design it that way someone created
the design
and then people came together and freely
decided
that they would put their efforts in to
constructing and raising this thing
up into the sky that's the explanation
the the geology and the physics kind of
by the by
they're the things that the people
choose to use
to to to take advantage of their
knowledge of those things in order to
build structures like this so if we seek
to explain
and not merely describe in terms of
deterministic laws
then we must invoke creativity
and various other abstract realities
reality is indeed a
unified whole of course reality is a
unified whole but at the same time we
can divide it up
into different in different ways
space-time and matter and energy or
fundamental particles and emergent
objects like
cats and galaxies or the physical
and the abstract and these various ways
of dividing
up reality of dividing things up don't
privilege one aspect over and above the
other
it is as correct to say that the cat is
moving the atoms from a to b
as it is to say that the cat moves from
a to b
because the atoms making up its body do
but there is a real distinction between
and this is another way of dividing up
reality explaining
something in terms of things that exist
and having an
in principle description of what the
particles are doing
and i've made this point with people
recently
and i i guess i am going off on this
tangent a little bit much
but let me just hop on again for a
moment about this
the explanation as to why
at the higher emergent level that
certain things occur is really
the explanation it is not the fact
that certain things were determined to
have happened
because the big bang happened and the
laws of motion acted upon particles over
time and
caused them to appear where they
appeared today
that is not an explanation that is an in
principle
you would be able to describe the motion
of those particles and where they end up
today and so
this is why the fabric of reality
winston churchill
copper atom story is just so deeply
profound
and i think escapes sometimes
the uh escapes discussions on this topic
let's just recap that and you can you
can fast forward the next five or ten
minutes as i go through this
yet again but but let me try and refine
it
in a certain way the the situation is
this
there is a statue in parliament square
in london of winston churchill and the
tip of that statue
is a copper atom why is the copper atom
there
now on the one hand you can say
that well the copper atom is there for
the same reason that
any atom is anywhere right now and any
atom is anywhere right now because
13.7 billion years in the past
approximately the big bang occurred
and all of matter and space and energy
exploded out from that point
and eventually some of it over millions
of years coalesced
into stars the first generation of stars
at the end of their lives some of them
exploded in supernova
supernovae explosions and scattered
their contents across
a wide region of space and some of those
atoms due to astrophysical processes
were copper atoms those copper atoms
then
coalesced mixing with the hydrogen
helium and the intergalactic space
and some of them formed new stars and
some of them formed planets as well
like the earth and so the earth formed
out of this previously exploded star or
stars
and contains copper and the copper atom
again under the forces of nature
under gravity and electromagnetism and
so on and so forth weathering and
erosion
ended up in a certain place where it was
quarried and
the forces of nature eventually caused
it to end up at the tip of
winston churchill's nose and that's why
that copper atom is there
due to deterministic physical laws
that's not an explanation that's a
general purpose statement about
any particular bit of matter anywhere in
the entire universe
and when people try to invoke this
to explain away something like free will
for example
and try to say it couldn't have been a
free choice because
you were determined to do what you were
determined to do
because at the big bang the laws of
physics that were there
are still acting right now and you have
to obey these deterministic laws
in the same way that the copper atom had
to obey a deterministic law to end up
where it did
it completely misses the point about
what an explanation truly is
free will is not an attempt to get
outside of the laws of physics
and it's an attempt to explain what is
really going on in the context of a
deterministic universe
in the context of a deterministic
universe
we have species arising that didn't
arise before
but no biologist should be tempted to
say
well there's no such thing as evolution
by natural selection evolution by
natural selection doesn't really create
new species
all that's happening is atoms are
following deterministic laws of physics
that would be ridiculous and i don't
think any physicist makes this point i
don't think any scientist no biologist
makes this point
what they say is the explanation of the
origin of species
is evolution by natural selection it's
this emergent
concept that these things called species
exist
this thing called selection exists and
that
niches are filled or niches as some
people say
by organisms that are fittest in that
particular environment and if the
environment changes
the genes are selected against and the
species can sometimes go extinct
to be filled by new species with genes
that are fitter for that particular
environment
that's an explanation it's an emergent
explanation but all and all of those
things are real
they're really happening selection is
really happening adaptation is really
happening
nature's really exist and species really
exist and fill those niches
now in precisely the same way
all we have to say is that the reason
why
for example the copper atom is at the
tip of winston churchill's nose
the explanation of that is that there
was a war
called the second world war involving
two sides of great powers
dominant among them the united kingdom
and germany
the leaders of whom were adolf hitler
and winston churchill and winston
churchill
eventually won the war for his side
and so we like to out of respect
remember great heroes who saved
civilization
one of whom was winston churchill
and as whom we learned recently karl
popper thought was a great
epistemologist
i'll go back to a previous episode for
that one
winston churchill is his statue is there
with a copper atom
at its nose because we make statues out
of bronze so that they don't weather
away quite so quickly
but someone chose to build that statue
chose to design it in that way in fact
groups of people
came to that decision and freely chose
to do so
and trying to eliminate choice
and freedom out of that whole picture is
to break what would otherwise be
a good explanation because we try and
say it's merely
determined by physical
laws deterministic laws
then we've missed the entire point of
trying to explain what's going on in the
real world
this reductionist conception
of how it is that reality evolves over
time
is simply it's not false but it simply
misses the point
it's true vacuously
we can always say that anything that
happens was determined to happen
it doesn't get us very far
in denying the supernatural we don't
have to
embrace pure reductionist
physicalism we can take another avenue
where we say
yes of course physics is
fundamentally true it's correct as a
description of reality
but it doesn't explain everything that's
going on and besides
the strange thing is that for someone
who says they could
in principle in principle
predict what a person is going to do
next
or predict what is going to happen next
if they had
a full description of the laws of
physics and the initial conditions
is doing nothing in my opinion but
invoking the supernatural
because what is this thing that is able
to actually do that predicting
well an oracle with the full knowledge
of the laws of physics well this oracle
is basically
the omniscient theistic god
the god that knows everything that's
going to happen the god that created the
universe and knows everything that's
going to happen
so it is a an appeal to the supernatural
now someone might say oh no we don't
need that maybe we can just have a
supercomputer of the future
i doubt it um this super computer of the
future would have to calculate
all of the different alternatives that
could possibly happen in
countless numbers of universes and it
would have to know
with perfect precision what the initial
conditions are
at any particular given time so that it
can make this deterministic prediction
but we know from physics you cannot have
a perfect understanding of the
conditions at any particular time
for all the atoms in the universe we're
going to have
a perfect understanding of where exactly
they are we know that's not possible
given the heisenberg uncertainty
principle among other things but we know
that we can't have this complete
knowledge simultaneously of every single
atom in the entire universe
relativity for another reason so this
idea
that we could in principle in principle
have this
predictive mechanism that would allow us
to determine exactly what's going to
happen next
is itself an appeal to the supernatural
the device required in order to do this
would be magical it would have to have
all the qualities that an omniscient
creator of the universe would have and
so this is why i reject this idea that
in principle the idea that
we could with full knowledge of the laws
of physics and
full knowledge of the initial conditions
predict what's going to happen next
therefore you don't have free will
i think is false because i don't think
such an
in-principle argument
has any bearing on the reality of free
will
when in practice it will never be
possible it will never be possible
because
no such device can do such a measurement
of all the particles in the entire
universe it would have to be
a god of some sort okay that takes me
far away from anything to do with this
chapter again
i think i've just decided that this is
not going to be
um episode 43
part 1 of chapter 16. i think this is
going to be part 0.
this is an introduction to some
introductory remarks to the
beginning of infinity now i can't really
go back and insert this at the beginning
of the chapter because it's going to
look a little bit weird because at the
beginning if you remember the
the sun wasn't shining straight into my
eyes but now it is
so that would look a bit weird if i cut
from sun shining into my eyes to
sun not shining into my eyes to sun
shining into my eyes again that would
look a little bit disjointed
so we're just going to persevere what we
were saying to recap to go back
um the david was saying that the unique
effects of creativity
dominate our experience of the world
okay i wanted to go back to this idea
that
creativity is the thing that determines
the
the physical look among other things of
the structures we see around us as
david says dominate our experience of
the world okay so i think he means
something significantly deeper than this
our literal experience of the world as
we're walking around the world we're
creating explanations of what we see
when we interact with people we're
creating knowledge
but just for illustrative purposes i
want to illustrate this
with again the sydney cbd but a
particular part
of it that many people will be familiar
with
namely what's called the the sydney
harbour
bridge which connects the sydney cbd
with the northern part of sydney it took
a while
for this bridge to be built back in the
1930s prior to which people had to drive
a long way around
the harbour and take many hours to get
from the southern part of sydney to
northern part of sydney now it takes
me minutes this is a very
big bridge and i want to ask the
question
why it is that it looks the way that it
does
just to harp on this for a little bit
longer well of course it it looks the
way it does
because the architect and engineering
team wanted it to look the way that it
does in fact i wanted
to look like the tine bridge which is in
newcastle in england
and also the hell gate bridge in new
york looks similar as well they wanted
it to look like this
but also and this is quite interesting
when you look at it it's got these stone
pylons there
which don't exist in the newcastle
bridge
it it does exist in the sydney harbor
bridge now why
now it's interesting these pylons
serve absolutely no structural function
they're not holding the bridge up they
look like they're nice and strong don't
they
and in fact that's the whole point
they're supposed to look
strong so the story goes when the plans
were first
shown to the public at the sydney town
hall or something and people were able
to
come on through or they'll put on the
front of the newspaper whatever happened
at the time
people objected that the sydney harbour
bridge
as it was proposed to look
seemed a little flimsy it seemed like it
didn't have the structural integrity
required
to support the weight of all the cars
and trains and people going across
it each day and so the the engineers
decided well let's add some big stone
pylons there
just to make it look stronger and that's
what they did and that's what ended up
happening
because people said yes this one looks a
lot better
and so it's interesting isn't it that
the reason why
the sydney harbor bridge looks the way
that it does
isn't due to not only just merely the
physical forces acting upon
the bits of metal and deterministic ways
but it's also not only because of the
choice of engineers and designers they
weren't
forced into having this particular
design
given the constraints of physics that
the choice was made
the free choice was made to add
design features that serve absolutely no
structural purpose whatsoever
they're just there to look good and so
granite was mined from down south in
moroya i think it was maruya
and the southern part of new south wales
uh
18 000 cubic metres of this stuff was
brought all the way up to sydney you
know
carted in trucks and a three plus
hour journey all the way north to sydney
in order to build these
you know carefully constructed stone
pylons that again
do absolutely nothing so the reason why
human creativity
just for aesthetics so aesthetics has
forced
ah not forced it has caused brought into
the world
of this particular huge structure and
that
that's the explanation the aesthetic
explanation is the explanation
and trying to deny the aesthetic
explanation would be a
kind of a ridiculous exercise i think
okay back to the book i'll read a little
longer now i'll try and get through the
entire next paragraph
nowadays that and by that david means
the unique effects of creativity
nowadays that includes the experience of
rapid innovation
by the time you read these words the
computer on which i am writing them
will be obsolete there will be
functionally better computers
that will require less human effort to
build
other books will have been written and
innovative buildings and other artifacts
will be constructed
some of which will be quickly superseded
while others
will stand for longer than the pyramids
have so far
surprising scientific discoveries will
be made some of which
will change the standard textbooks
forever all these consequences of
creativity
make for an ever-changing way of life
which is possible
only in a long-lived dynamic society
a phenomenon that nothing other than
creative thought
could possibly bring about however
as i pointed out in the previous chapter
and chapter one
it was only recently in the history of
our species
that creativity has had any of those
effects
in prehistoric times it would not have
been obvious to a casual observer
say an explorer from an extraterrestrial
civilization
that humans were capable of creative
thought at all
it would have seemed that we were doing
no more than endlessly repeating the
lifestyle to which we were genetically
adapted
just like all other billions of species
in the biosphere
clearly we were tool users but so were
many other species we were communicating
using symbolic language but again that
was not unusual
even bees do that we were domesticating
other species but
so do ants closer observation would have
revealed that human languages
and the knowledge for human tool use or
being transmitted
through memes and not through genes this
made us fairly unusual but still not
obviously creative
several other species have memes but
what they do not have is the means of
improving them
other than through random trial and
error so that there is a
pausing there that there is a crucial
point that
other animals might very well have memes
but not the means of improving them
they might do this random trial and
error thing but they're not
intelligently designing the knowledge
as we would do we have memes
and we are able to construct memes
deliberately
if we like not always but if we want to
we can construct certain memes we can
work hard
to create a new theory and you design
something that will persist
over time animals tend not to do this
people are as david says in the
beginning of infinity you know sort of
um
overly impressed by the modest
achievements
of the higher apes or of
certain dolphins and so on but it is a
categorical difference between
human beings and every other species on
the planet
now there is something that david will
say later about
species that existed prior to us
homo erectus perhaps neanderthal and so
on
these other um homo species
that seem to have had
the capacity to explain the world
because they had
art they had the capacity to create fire
um there's a whole bunch of other bits
of evidence and bits of the puzzle that
go together
when considered as a whole one would say
well it seems as though these other
species
different to us did have this capacity
now i'll have something to say about
this when we get there
because it seems as though all of these
species did arise
in the same place it seems like they had
a common ancestor
and that common ancestor we might wonder
could have been the first universal
explainer and we've descended from that
and for the reasons that david will say
in the book that capacity for explaining
the world
wasn't used for much at all
until recently biologically speaking
or geologically speaking in terms of um
time frames that we're talking about
so just just continuing talking about
those other species that seem to have
memes like some of the great apes for
example
they don't seem to have the capacity to
improve those memes except through
random trial and error
and david goes on to say nor are they
capable of sustained improvement over
many generations
today the creativity that humans use to
improve ideas
is what preeminently sets us apart
from other species okay so pausing there
and this is where i'll end
this we got you know just a little over
uh one page i think through the book so
this is a record for me this is a record
um in terms of ratio to reading to
commenting
anyway this thing that sets us apart
from other species david says
i would say the importance of this
cannot be understated it's it's
everything especially in moral terms and
this links to to chapter 12
bad philosophy what separates us
as humans from other animals
and this might very well include knowing
for example as is discussed in chapter
12 knowing whether or not other
species can suffer or indeed experience
qualia of any kind have a subjective
experience
of any kind one thing we know
is that animals are nothing like people
at all in this sense when it comes to
creativity we're very alike in terms of
biology
granted the brain our brain the
homologous structures as we say
look similar the brain looks similar in
the human as it does in the great apes
as it does in the dolphins mammals and
large brained creatures
the brains all have similar structures
but this doesn't mean anything you know
like computers have
similar internal structures but some of
them will be running a word process and
some of them will be running a
3d game and some of them will be running
youtube and so on
that what the computer is actually doing
can look vastly different and i think
that the
difference between the software that's
going on inside of a human brain and
every other animal is
categorically black and white different
different
and it's not just a matter of degree
like dolphins can learn some tricks and
we can learn lots of tricks
and apes can learn to communicate one
with another and we can learn
to communicate far better their
vocabulary is 50 our vocabulary is
500 000. you can choose your own
favorite animal and then the criteria by
which you want to compare humans
with that animal in order to to
to say how intelligent that animal is in
comparison to us that they're they're
they're kind of just like us well i
would say no they're completely
different it's night and day
because people are universal universal
in their capacity to create new
knowledge which means literally
whatever can be understood can be
understood by us
if there is an explanation out there if
there's a physical phenomena out there
which has an explanation we can find the
explanation
no other species that exists no other
extant
species on the planet can do this
it is this special capacity that we have
this ability to model the universe and
this is how i kind of began
today's episode that sets us apart from
the other species that are out there
those other species can't create
explanations of the kind that we can
those other species are trapped by their
genes in what they can
do their behaviors and if they can
understand anything at all
it is only what their genes allow them
to understand
the difference between poison and food
for example
the difference between hot and cold
let's say possibly
i don't know but if it can understand
anything at all it's condemned
by its genes whereas we're not condemned
by our genes
in the same way and as more time goes on
and more knowledge is accumulated by us
and as we create more explanations
we escape we achieve escape velocity
from our genes
entirely and so the diseases that ravage
us because of the
imperfections of our genome can be
left behind because we have used our
memes used our knowledge to overcome
the problems that we have genetically
but the
the animal can't do this the environment
changes
and the animal can go extinct the entire
species of animals can go extinct unless
we choose to do something about it as
i've also said
this is not like a person the
environment around a person changes
and the person will change the
environment rather than be changed by it
typically speak sometimes the
environment does change too fast
a tsunami happens an earthquake happens
okay we get that
but as time goes on our capacity to deal
with these things
ever faster and ever more robustly
will continue to improve so we are
categorically different
there is something very special and
unique about us
and we don't understand it fully david
is about to explain
the little we do know about how
creativity evolved
here on planet earth and what it was
used for for so long
because apparently our ancestors had it
our ancestors
went extinct and he'll talk about what
did homo sapiens do maybe we were at war
with these other
species and that's the reason why those
species are no longer here
i don't think he buys that particular
idea
because we can consider what static
societies were about we've talked about
that previously
but i have want of another word
ranted this episode i have talked
um a lot and so this is rather than
titling this episode
um one i will go back and retroactively
title this episode zero because i don't
think we got through enough to really
call this a proper
beginning of infinity chapter
exploration this really is
an introduction and brett having
a an opportunity to indulge himself with
some of the very exciting things that
all come to bear that come together
from the entire rest of the beginning of
infinity and
and come together to really support
for want of another word we shouldn't
say support but come together
to frame and shape what this chapter
chapter 16 is going to be all about so
look forward to the next episode
which i hope will be out soon once more
thank you to
all the patreon supporters and the
paypal supporters as well
um find me on patreon find me on paypal
the links are there at www.bretthall.org
on the front page there i think you can
find
some links there to how you could
support me and my endeavours in
continuing to explore the beginning of
infinity
and at this rate at this rate i was
using today
it will take us another 10 episodes to
get through this chapter no i won't i
will
promise to read more next chapter
and comment perhaps a little less we'll
see how we go until then bye
[Music]
you